#summary Bulk Operations

= Bulk Operations =

Once assignments have been created, Sarsoft allows you to update and print them in bulk so that you can easily prepare a PDF packet for the operational period or update the radio frequency without manually touching each assignment.  You can access this on the operational period detail page ("Current Operations: List" on the home page).

== Bulk Update ==

When you click Bulk Update, the list of assignments gets pushed down the page by a set of input fields.  The assignment list also becomes selectable - rather than taking you to the assignment detail page, clicking on an assignment highlights it.  You can sort the table and then use Shift and Ctrl (Command on Mac) clicking to select a group of assignments.

When bulk updating assignments it is important to keep the following in mind:

 * Any field left blank will be ignored; you will not wipe out the assignment's current values.
 * The text inputs for previous efforts & dropoff/pickup are all or nothing.  Anything you enter will wipe out the assignment's current value rather than being concatenated at the end.
 * Modifying any assignment will return it to Draft status.  If you want to move the assignments to Prepared after your changes are applied, you need to enter your name and click "Save Changes and Prepare Assignment".

== Bulk Print ==

Clicking Bulk Print allows you to select and print a group of assignments using the same mechanism as bulk update.  You can choose whether or not to print the SAR 104 forms and select up to 5 map backgrounds to print with each assignment.  It's important to keep in mind that at 4 forms and several maps per assignment, the resulting document can get very large very quickly.  It can take a while for the browser to download all the map background imagery; you should scroll through the page or use print preview to make sure that maps are fully loaded before firing off a large print job.